Add a mechanism to define plugins (#578)
mapproxy/mapproxy: doc/plugins.rst

Writing plugins
===============

Since MapProxy 1.15, it is possible to write plugins for MapProxy that can
add new sources, services or commands. This requires Python >= 3.7

Example
-------

The mapproxy_hips plugin at https://github.com/rouault/mapproxy_hips is an

> example of a plugin, which adds a new source, service and customize the demo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
example of a plugin, which adds a new source, service and customizes the demo
```

service, demonstrating all the below points.

How to add a plugin ?
---------------------

> A plugin should be written as a Python package whose setuptools setup()

Reviewer: Link to setuptools?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A plugin should be written as a Python package whose setuptools ``setup()``
```

> method has a entry_points keywords with a group ``mapproxy`` pointing to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
method has a ``entry_points`` keyword with a group ``mapproxy`` pointing to
```

a module with a ``plugin_entrypoint`` method.

.. code-block:: python

    entry_points={"mapproxy": ["hips = mapproxy_hips.pluginmodule"]},

> In this example, the mapproxy_hips/pluginmodule.py file should have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the ``mapproxy_hips/pluginmodule.py`` file should have
```

            :param yaml_spec_service_name: Name of the service in the YAML configuration file
            :type yaml_spec_service_name: str
            :param yaml_spec_service_def: Definition of the service in the YAML configuration file
            :type yaml_spec_service_def: dict
        """

This can for example by used like the following snippet:

.. code-block:: python

    from mapproxy.config.loader import register_service_configuration
    from mapproxy.service.base import Server

    class MyExtraServiceServer(Server):
        # Look at classes at https://github.com/mapproxy/mapproxy/tree/master/mapproxy/service
        # for a real implementation
        names = ('my_extra_service',)
        def __init__(self):
            pass

    def my_extra_service_method(serviceConfiguration, conf):
        return MyExtraServiceServer()

    register_service_configuration('my_extra_service', my_extra_service_method,
                                   'my_extra_service', {'foo': str()})

This allows the following declaration in the YAML mapproxy configuration file:

.. code-block:: yaml

    services:
        my_extra_service:
            foo: bar

> A real-world implementation can be found at https://github.com/rouault/mapproxy_hips/blob/master/mapproxy_hips/service/hips.py

Reviewer: If I understand the tests below correctly, this also includes tests with minimnal example plugin. This is awesome.

Customizing layer metadata in YAML configuration file
-----------------------------------------------------

When implementing a new service, it might be useful to add per-layer metadata
for it. The YAML validator needs to be updated to recognize the new keywords.
The ``add_subcategory_to_layer_md()`` method of the ``mapproxy.config.spec`` module
can be used to do that.

.. code-block:: python

    def add_subcategory_to_layer_md(category_name, category_def):
        """ Add a new category to wms_130_layer_md.
            Used by plugins
        """

> This can for example by used like the following snippet:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can for example be used like in the following snippet:
```

.. code-block:: python

    from mapproxy.config.loader import register_source_configuration
    from mapproxy.config.loader import SourceConfiguration

    class my_source_configuration(SourceConfiguration):
        source_type = ('my_extra_source',)

        def source(self, params=None):
            # Look at classes at https://github.com/mapproxy/mapproxy/tree/master/mapproxy/source
            # for a real implementation
            class MySource(object):
                def __init__(self):
                    self.extent = None
            return MySource()

    register_source_configuration('my_extra_source', my_source_configuration,
                                  'my_extra_source', {'foo': str()})

This allows the following declaration in the YAML mapproxy configuration file:

.. code-block:: yaml

    sources:
        some_source_name:
            type: my_extra_source
            foo: bar

A real-world implementation can be found at https://github.com/rouault/mapproxy_hips/blob/master/mapproxy_hips/source/hips.py

Customizing the demo service
----------------------------

The :ref:`demo_service_label` can be customized in two ways:

> - Customizing the output of the /demo HTML output, by typically adding entries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Customizing the output of the ``/demo`` HTML output, typically by adding entries
```

  for new services. This is done with the ``register_extra_demo_substitution_handler()``
  method of the ``mapproxy.service.demo`` module.

  .. code-block:: python

        def register_extra_demo_substitution_handler(handler):
            """ Method used by plugins to register a new handler for doing substitutions
                to the HTML template used by the demo service.
                The handler passed to this method is invoked by the DemoServer._render_template()
                method. The handler may modify the passed substitutions dictionary
                argument. Keys of particular interest are 'extra_services_html_beginning'
                and 'extra_services_html_end' to add HTML content before/after built-in
                services.

                :param handler: New handler for incoming requests
                :type handler: function that takes 3 arguments(DemoServer instance, req and a substitutions dictionary argument).
            """

> - Handling new request paths under the /demo/ hierarchy, typically to implement a new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Handling new request paths under the ``/demo/`` hierarchy, typically to implement a new
```

  service. This is done with the ``register_extra_demo_server_handler()``
  method of the ``mapproxy.service.demo`` module.

  .. code-block:: python

        def register_extra_demo_server_handler(handler):
            """ Method used by plugins to register a new handler for the demo service.
                The handler passed to this method is invoked by the DemoServer.handle()

>                 method when receiving an incoming request, and let a chance to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                method when receiving an incoming request. This enables handlers to
```

>                 handler to process it, if it is relevant to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                process it, in case it is relevant to it.
```

                :param handler: New handler for incoming requests
                :type handler: function that takes 2 arguments (DemoServer instance and req) and
                               returns a string with HTML content or None
            """

> This can for example by used like the following snippet:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can for example be used like in the following snippet:
```

.. code-block:: python

    from mapproxy.service.demo import register_extra_demo_server_handler, register_extra_demo_substitution_handler

    def demo_server_handler(demo_server, req):
        if 'my_service' in req.args:
            return 'my_return'
        return None

    def demo_substitution_handler(demo_server, req, substitutions):
        html = '<h2>My extra service</h2>'
        html += '<a href="/demo?my_service">My service</a>'
        substitutions['extra_services_html_beginning'] += html

    register_extra_demo_server_handler(demo_server_handler)
    register_extra_demo_substitution_handler(demo_substitution_handler)

A real-world example can be found at https://github.com/rouault/mapproxy_hips/blob/master/mapproxy_hips/service/demo_extra.py

Adding new commands to mapproxy-util
------------------------------------

New commands can be added to :ref:`mapproxy-util` by using the
``register_command()`` method of the ``mapproxy.script.util`` module

.. code-block:: python

    def register_command(command_name, command_spec):
        """ Method used by plugins to register a command.

>             :param command_name: Name of the service

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            :param command_name: Name of the command
```

            :type command_name: str
            :param command_spec: Definition of the command. Dictionary with a 'func' and 'help' member
            :type command_spec: dict
        """

> This can for example by used like the following snippet:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can for example be used like in the following snippet:
```
